Galápagos penguins are confined to the Galápagos Islands, foraging in the cool Cromwell Current during the day and returning to the land at night. They eat small schooling fish, mainly mullet, sardines, pilchards and anchovies,[9] and sometimes crustaceans. They play a role in regulating the populations of the marine species they consume. At the same time, the adult Galápagos penguins are a food source for other predators such as sharks and whales. They normally range only a few kilometers from their breeding sites, depending on the cold, nutrient-rich currents to bring them food.

Air temperatures in the Galápagos remain in the range 15–28 °C (59–82 °F). During El Niño seasons, the penguins defer breeding because their food becomes less abundant; this makes the chances of raising offspring successfully unfavorable compared to the chances of dying in the attempt. This was especially detrimental during the 1982-83 El Niño, where a decline in population of 77% was observed.[13] The penguins usually breed when the sea surface temperature is below 25 °C (77 °F). The strong tropical sun is problematic for this species. Their primary means of cooling off is going in the water, but other behavioral adaptations for thermoregulation come into play when they must remain on land. One method involves stretching out their flippers and hunching forward to keep the sun from shining on their feet, which exchange heat rapidly because they have high blood flow and lack insulation. Another method is to pant, using evaporation to cool the throat and airways. Galápagos penguins protect their eggs and chicks from the hot sun by keeping them in deep crevices in the rocks.


Galápagos penguin swimming in water.
The Galápagos penguins' flipper-like wings and streamlined bodies enhance their easy movements in water.[14] Their white and black colors also aid in thermal regulation and camouflaging.[14] All these features promote and ensure survival in the harsh conditions present in their coastal habitat, hence the symbiotic relationship between the Galápagos penguins and their natural environment. The penguins' breeding patterns depend on finding suitable nesting places within the volcanic landscape. The Galápagos penguins find refuge in the cool and dark lava caves, which provide the appropriate conditions for raising their offspring since they offer protection from the sun, ensuring survival.[14] This indicates specific behavioral patterns and features that enhance their adaptability in this particular environment.